So, again, thank you and welcome. Thank you for taking the time to come together and practice
and reflect a little bit. I don't know, I hope, if anyone was expecting Lama Drakpa here today,
I'm sorry. I was supposed to go to New York City and Lama Drakpa stay here, but kind of
at the last minute we realized we had to swap. So I'm here today. Lama Drakpa is in New York
City at our monthly meditation there. And right now, I don't know how many of you were
here last week, but we did a little bit more extended kind of review of the 18 freedoms
and endowments and kind of went over those and then also these kind of 16 kind of circumstances
and kind of propensities we might have that if we don't watch out for them, they can really
kind of make our freedoms and endowments diminish. So we went over that a little bit last week
and a couple people wrote with some questions. I thought before we begin again, you know,
all of us before we start anything, again, connecting with our real purity motivations,
our true joy, appreciation, bodhicitta, pure perception, devotion, you know, really especially
re-strengthening our bodhicitta and our openness awareness, our wisdom awareness, really just
tapping into how open our situation is and really connect with, you know, with that joy
and appreciation for our beautiful situation. Just really let that sink deep and just vastly
splash, you know, really extend our bodhicitta to every living being, including ourselves,
you know, as sentient beings by definition, right? Sentient beings pervasive as space.
We're all experiencing some kind of challenge due to just our basic ignorance of our situation.
In big ways and little ways, we're all struggling with our emotions and our, you know, our
ignorance,
our hopes and our fears. And so just really, we're going to just again, taking the time,
we'll all just each reconnect with that motivation that we can truly with our practice, with
our study, our contemplation, our practice, both on the cushion, off the cushion, we can
really truly be a benefit to other beings. Again, as vast as space in temporary ways,
as well as eventually that we have the ability to help lead them to enlightenment, to realize
their own beautiful nature. And then in particular, you know, really connecting with this bodhic
itta
that we're connecting with now and reflecting on these, the Vajrayana, the teachings of
the Buddha, and in particular, connecting with the Vajrayana teachings and these beautiful
essential foundational teachings of the nundra practices, which embody all the Buddha's teachings
and practices. And then in particular, are the ground and the essence for our Vajrayana
and Zoktian practice, which means also our Vajrayana and Zoktian realization, which is
again falls right back to bodhicitta, the heart, the heart of enlightenment, the heart
of the Dharma, the real heart of our practice.
So I thought this precious human birth, always calling to mind within the outer nundra practices,
the precious human birth is the first one we come upon. And it's just so vital. Again,
these four thoughts that turn the mind were encouraged to do not just with our nundra,
but before any practice we do, whether we verbalize it, or just internally reflect on
them. And so again, both within our, our formal session, as well as just throughout the day,
taking time to study, to read, to truly contemplate, both maybe with a book or listening, but also
just as we're in the world reflecting on what we remember, really bringing this to heart
and home, you know, not just our precious human birth, but what else, right, impermanence,
the law of karma, the defects of samsara, just really bringing them in. And we can see
how in each one, kind of their elements of those other four. And why? Because we tend
to forget. And like Kenpoche says, reflecting on these four thoughts, it just helps kind
of bring some more warmth and moisture softens our hard heads and brings some warmth and
moisture and openness and warm hardness and appreciation for our situation just by looking
at it. So this precious, you know, the freedoms and endowments of this human birth are extremely
difficult to obtain. That's what we talked about last week. And again, we just went over
kind of a little more detail what these freedoms and favorable conditions are. And we know,
right, there's eight freedom states, eight freedom states where we were free of situations
where we wouldn't be able to study or practice Dharma. And we have, we're totally endowed
with these totally favorable conditions for actually practicing and realizing the Dharma
for the benefit of ourselves and others. So again, just kind of quickly reviewing what
those things are. The eight freedom states that we find ourselves, right, we're free
of being born in the hell realms. We're free of being born in the hungry ghost realms.
We're free of being born in the animal realms. We're free of being born in the God realms.
We're free of being, we're born human. And yet we are born human. We're free of being
born human in a world where a Buddha never appeared. We're also free of being born human
in a world where the Buddha appeared, but we're free of being born in a part of the world
where the Buddha's teachings don't exist. And we're also free of being born in a human
world where the Buddha's teachings have come and where they're around us, where we were
born and where we live. And we're free of having all those conditions, but we're also
free of having wrong views, which in this case we could think of like just really not
having any true trust in the law of cause and effect or any real interest or devotion in
the three jewels or the Buddhist teachings. We're free of that. Obviously we all have
some degree of interest in the Buddhist teachings, which means we're aware of them to some degree.
And then also kind of similar, we're free of being born human in a world born to the
Dharma in a place where the Buddhist teachings are around us. But then also we're free of
a situation where to do the circumstances of our body or our mind, we're unable to actually
connect with them. So we're free of all those. And then we have all these beautiful outer
circumstances where we are born, which are then these 10 freedoms, five that are referring
to the outer circumstances we're born and five that are connected to the inner kind
of proclivities and kind of circumstances of our mind. And again, to review those quickly,
we're born where a Buddha has appeared. We're born where the Buddha taught. We're born where
those teachings still exist. We're born where those teachings are still practiced. They're
still followed. They're still able to be understood. And we're born where those who do follow them
and do understand them have the great kindness to share them. And then these five inner qualities
we have, we have interest in the in the teachings, we're able, we're able to connect with them.
We have trust and faith in the Dharma. We're so it's, it's a beautiful situation, but we
want to guide that. We want to guard that. Because like Kim Porem Pashay says, and what
we kind of spent more time talking with last week was, you know, while we might have all
these freedoms and endowments, sometimes these last two kind of waiver. So that's why it's
so important we really pay attention to our mindfulness, our alertness, our conscientiousness,
really don't let our negative emotions get the best of us and try to purify when they
do. And be careful about, you know, why we're tender young ones. You know, the influence
we have, the influences that we subject ourselves to, you know, as far as, you know, other people
we look to and trust in for advice and guidance and reaffirmation, you know, just being careful
of that. And really watching our authenticity and being careful with our actions. I don't
know. That's what it kind of boils down to. So I want to kind of get to the questions.
I just thought to quickly review those. So Kristin asked one question. So it's especially
regarded in regard to like this fourth freedom, which is, so she said, we're fortunate not
to be born in a time or place where the culture is barbaric, where violence and ego are glorified.
Yet it seems there is such an acceleration of these qualities. Can you address this?
How do we make sense and understand and work with this? So I guess one thing, I think I
understand the question and there's different ways to answer this. And of course I'm no
big expert. I'm just another Dharma sibling. So I'm sure by all of us hearing people's
questions, we have our own kind of can turn our mind to the richness of our understanding
of what some of the answers of that are. But here again, we're particularly talking about
this in the context of being practitioners. And we're also particularly really connecting
with how each one of us as practitioners are addressing this for ourselves, how we're working
with our own mind and our own circumstances. And of course, as we can help others, but
we're really talking about ourselves here. So, you know, sometimes this word barbarian
came up and I was talking about that. Forgive me, I'm a little, I just want to kind of parse
that out a little bit because right when we say these prayers, how, you know, the soul
refuge and the soul source of refuge is the Buddhist teachings. Of course, in the big,
big, big picture, we all have this beautiful connection with Dharma and the Buddhist teachings.
But what are the essence of the Buddhist teachings? I think we could say loving kindness,
compassion,
and wisdom, and understanding. So I think it's safe to say wherever those qualities
exist in some degree, that's getting close to the Dharma, right? Because the Dharma isn't
this foreign element. The Dharma is the essence of every living being. And so even if, you
know, there are vehicles, even in the Buddhist teaching, the Buddha points out, yes, there's
the teachings, the vehicles of the nine yanas, but there's also worldly vehicles. And when
it's in those vehicles, especially that can recognize cause and effect, but not necessarily
looking for liberation or freedom from samsara, but doing good things in order to have good
circumstances in this and future lives. And that means there's some degree of especially
loving kindness and good thoughts towards others and compassion and some degree of wisdom,
at least the wisdom to kind of believe in cause and effect. And that's okay, we can
be reborn in good circumstances, you know. But what's so special is then wherever a Buddha
appears is giving the teachings for exploring deeply the nature, both how it functions and
appears, but also the essence and the nature of that. So I think that's important to remember.
And then in particular here, again, when it's talking about sometimes these mentioning barbarians,
it's meaning a place like I mentioned here, a place where born in a world, we can be born
even in this world, maybe now the Buddhist teachings are very quite pervasive. But you
know, there were times when the Buddhist teachings weren't available, where they were maybe
thriving
in little pockets of the world, but not available to a bunch of people. So that's kind of also
what it's indicating is when wherever we're born, we could be born in a world where the
Buddhist teachings exist, but just due to where we're born, not have ever have any contact
with them. So that's one thing. But then of course, as sentient beings, we're working
with our negative emotions. And I think that's also what Kristin was more kind of asking
about here. You know, how it sounds like she's just reflecting on how maybe it might appear
that there's an acceleration of self, you know, kind of culture of self involvement,
and violence, kind of being glorified as well as who knows all kinds of other things we
can get wrapped up in. And I know in the Buddhist teachings on the gross level, this is a degener
ate
age. This is a time where we have more challenges come up more inner turmoil and imbalance more
outer turmoil and imbalance in all kinds of ways. And the important thing to remember
here is again, like the teachers always point out to us, these circumstances aren't random.
They're all the effects of our own individual and collective past actions. So we're Dharma
again, we're Dharma practitioners. So we maybe what we're talking about here, we may not
necessarily share with someone who's not interested or you know, but here we're Dharma
practitioners,
you know, we're thinking about these things. That means we're taking responsibility for
our own experience. So in the teachings, these big cycles happen of golden ages, degenerate
ages, you know, rising and falling, you know, really pristine, easy times even in human
worlds, but then also really rough times. And that's all again, that's all just the reflection
of the inner views and actions and motivations of ourselves. And of course, like we always
hear what makes all the difference is how we move forward, what view we take, what intention,
what motivation we have as we move forward. And that's again, what in these teachings
even on the 18 freedoms and endowments, so rare to find, you know, like we can read about,
you know, the examples of how rare this human birth is to find and comparisons and things
like that such as, you know, very famous, the sea turtle, the blind sea turtle that comes
up only surfaces once every hundred years or every, even sometimes every aeon, you know,
not only surfaces on the ocean, but happens to surface where there happens to be like
a wooden yoke, a wooden ring bobbing on the surface. And this blind sea turtle happens
to surface once every hundred years to, to take a breath. That's the famous classical
example of the Buddha gave for how rare this precious human birth is. Or another one that
like Patra Rinpoche mentions is the chances of being born human are as rare as if we had
a bunch of dried peas and toss them at the wall, the chances of one sticking, you know,
or like the numerical comparisons. You know, if, like, if we look at all the stars, if
it's a totally moonlit, you know, moon free night, sky full of clear, full of stars, the
mount in the teachings, right? The sutras, the Buddha says the vastness of all those
stars at night, if we were to say those were all the hell realm beings, then the comparison
of all the other beings in the six realms would be like how many stars we see in the
day, right? One, maybe two in the morning. And then likewise, we could say and then for
the hungry ghosts, if they were the amount of stars in the sky, you know, the, the animals
and the other higher realms would be as vast as would be as in comparison, just like the
day star, and so on we could go. Or like also another comparison was like with grain with
like particles of dust and snow. Like if we were to look at it just to give comparisons,
I think the Buddha said things we can kind of begin to imagine at least the hell realms,
the amount of beings born in hell realms is as vast as however, how many particles of
dust there are in the whole world. And then in comparison to that, all the hungry ghosts
are about as many grains of sand there are in like the huge the Ganges River, or like
any huge big river in the world, the Mississippi River.
The number of animals. I want to make sure I have my the number of animals are how many,
like if we they use the metaphor of like a barrel of of barley, or like we could say
a silo of barley or a big giant barrel of rice or grains, how many animals there are.
And then the asuras, the demigods, there is as many of those in relation to these proportions
as snowflakes and a blizzard. And then how many gods, how many humans and kind of other
gods is as much dust on your fingernail. This precious human birth is very rare in the teachings
and there's all kinds of other ways we could look at how rare it is. And like we know,
it is very rare. But then what's our second our second thought that turns the mind impermanence.
It's not here forever. And what's going to make all the difference for the future is
again, our beautiful circumstances are also due to our past actions and beautiful connections
and the merit and wisdom we have accumulated. How beautiful and we want to nurture that
and protect it and grow it even more. And so that's why, you know, as practitioners,
we're meeting the situation we find ourselves to develop our bodhicitta. And what is that?
I mean, of course, the six paramitas. And I want to read the second question someone
wrote just because it is beginning to fit in here too. And I'm not going to be able
to answer all this because we have to do our practice. But this was from one of Reap's,
one of our Dharma brothers in Nashville, who as we know, there was this tragedy last week
or the week before of the shooting. So he was asking that in that context of, you know,
these shootings happening. It was good to be reminded of our Buddha nature and the proximity
of enlightened beings of the tradition. It was good to recite mantras of compassionate
beings and to remember their and our commitment to all beings. But then what he's asking about
is I'm still wanting to know how to hear more about how practitioners in the raw moment,
how should we approach tragedy? And how should we speak to others affected by tragedy? I
think in a way that kind of goes back, kind of is connected with Christian's question
about, you know, oh, maybe it might seem like there's this big acceleration of self-importance
and violence and distraction in the world. I guess that's all relative. I mean, I'll
make one little side comment about that is I think we have to really kind of look, investigate,
you know, that kind of thing when we were looking for the good old days or something.
This isn't a perfect time. Of course, there is a lot of these things happening and things
to be careful of just as ordinary beings, not to mention Dharma practitioners. But I
mean, for example, it's kind of rare right now that our big entertainment is to go watch
someone pulled apart at the county square, you know, or I mean, there's all kinds of
other examples we could have. And maybe they've been a little bit transformed and commercialized
now. I don't know. But anyway, I think that's just one kind of little side note. I thought
reading it is yes, it can seem that way, but it's good to to reflect on. Samsara is samsara.
And there is tragedy, whether it's the tragedy that ourselves or others get caught up in
these big distractions and actions that just lead to, you know, heavy karma. And also those
of us, you know, who are grieving, who have had loss and are faced with confusion and
just overwhelming kind of not knowing what to do or loss, whether it's the climate or
shootings or losing a friend, or there's so many things, right. But we're practitioners
again, it's what it comes back to. And I know you all know that. But something I find helpful
to remember is that bodhicitta is the heart of our practice. And what is bodhicitta? But
often bodhicitta is loving kindness, bodhicitta is compassion. But it's again, as we're addressing
ourselves and our own challenges, as well as trying to nourish others and help support
others going through their challenges. Bodhicitta isn't just the love and compassion, the loving
kindness we're evoking. Bodhicitta is love, compassion, and wisdom. And so, especially
for ourselves, our bodhicitta practice is equally as much as it is connecting with kind
of accumulating merit through patience, through generosity, through kind of proper conduct,
through joyful effort and merit. We're accumulating those yes, but right, but we're also
accumulating
wisdom, which means that in the biggest, most direct sense are emptiness awareness. Even
in the foundational vehicles, there's emptiness awareness of at least one thing, right, of
the self. And then in different degrees of awareness of emptiness of other. And as Vajrayana
practitioners, at least the view we're starting on is in great emptiness. But great emptiness,
as we know, and what I think these questions are also getting at, and like with especially
Reese's question and I think Kristin's too, is yes, you know, this is all an illusion,
this is all empty and open. But by no means, again, it's not just wisdom. There's love.
There's compassion. That means we want to still feel. We don't want to shirk away from
our challenges, or our hopes, or our fears, or our sensitive spots, our blind spots, you
know, our growth edges. But as much as we can kind of keep that open mind, open heart,
emptiness awareness, that nothing is singular, nothing is independent, nothing is permanent,
and know that negative emotions aren't going to, engaging and following through with them
habitually, or intentionally, isn't going to help ourselves or others. And realize we
need to tame our own minds, refrain from harm, engage with good, tame our own minds and feel.
So right, that's a big part in our bodhicitta training of like Tonglen is about feeling
equally with our emptiness awareness, with the open mind, open heart, kind of that big
view, also having a big heart and really embracing as much as we can challenges, you know, so
like for example, even with ourselves, when we bump up to our emotions, when we bump up
to our sorrow, when we bump up to our grief, when we bump up to our shame, when we bump
up with our anger, when we bump up with our jealousy, when we bump up with our arrogance,
you know, when we bump up with our doubt and hesitation, when we meet those things, we
want to, you know, a wisdom isn't just like numbing out to them or looking the other way.
With wisdom, we're rooted in the great openness of things. And again, we're developing our
wisdom too, right? I know, but that's why they call it practice. But my point here is,
as much as we can be open, just even with ourselves to those things and really feel them and try
to release them. And then like with Tonglen, where we're feeling those feelings, and just
think how many other beings are going through the same things, and take that in and try
to connect with peace and the antidote, the, you know, the satisfaction and fulfillment
and give that to every living being, right? This is all on the intention way, aspiration
way. But that's so fundamental. That's a big part of our bodhicitta training. And then
thinking of all the situations, trying to understand what others are going through to
at least begin to understand. But if we can touch base with our own challenges and our
own grief, and think of all the others going through that too, and the mistakes we've made,
I mean, all of that, and purify, but also just kind of think we're not alone, think
of all the others, you know, going through that. So that's kind of very simple, I hope
it's not too patent answer. But I think it's an important one, just as good human beings,
not to mention Dharma practitioners, again, connecting, feeling, having an open mind and
an open heart, being able to witness our own jagged broken places, and those of others,
and then have some understanding, you know, that love and compassion. But then, more importantly,
as far as liberation from samsara goes, this great roar of the lion is the great emptiness,
the great openness of the situation. And that's why we're practicing. And I'm sorry, I think
I'm running out of time, as far as I hope that's helpful. There's more to say. I'm sure if
you were all here, we could have a big discussion. But within the time we have, I think that's
where I'll leave this now. Wisdom, love, compassion, blended together in our practice, as
practitioners,
really feeling, being aware, having the courage to lean into those kind of unwelcome situations
and scary situations and, you know, to the degree, you know, that is within our capacities.
And then in the world, I think, you know, there's all kinds of different people we can
meet who have their own availability and capacities. But the very basic thing we can do is, again,
keep our own practice, keep our prayers for this world and all worlds, keep our bodhicitta
strong. And then as we're interacting with people, we don't need to, I think, just being
present and open and kind is the thing, the most cross the board thing we can do, you
know, for helping people through hard times, especially here, kind of relieving, talking
about this question about how to be with these raw grief, for example, with ourselves, but
then also to help support others was part of that question. So, again, we all each individually
have different capacities and familiarity with dealing with that grief, for example.
And also other people have different, you know, availability and ability to receive
what we can offer. But we all thrive in an environment of openness, of like gentleness,
of just being present and centered. If we can each, it's amazing how medicinal, just
like, right, being present and centered can be. If we're ever with these great beings
who are or even another good friend who's centered and present, just that's healing.
And just being, having them available to us, you know, to share with. And then, of course,
as Dharma practitioners, reminding each other of our practice. So I guess that's all I can
really say, simply in a minute, about helping others in the immediacy of things. But, yeah,
so thank you. We'll do our practice now.
Kindness and, again, connecting with motivation. If we have the presence of mind to reconnect
with our true wishes for the situation, we may not be able to change them, but sometimes
in that confusion of strong emotions coming back to seeing what's the alarm bell going
off there. What is my true intention, especially my true motivation that's joyfully aligned
with Dharma, with love, compassion and wisdom, right?
Thank you. Thank you very much for coming. And then, if you don't mind, I just wanted
to add kind of review and a couple of small points around, that I meant to mention as
answers to the questions that came up, which maybe I'm going to focus more on the aspect
of what do we do with rough emotions? What do we do with the rough circumstances outside
and rough turbulence inside and around us? Whatever one of them there are, whichever
one of the five poisons or the five emotions are roiling and boiling and sloshing. We're
Dharma practitioners. So, in the sense of as Dharma practitioners, we have to remember
that yes, the world may be having what might seem like accelerated challenges and imbalance
and turmoil in the environment, in the minds and actions of beings in this world. We're
Dharma practitioners. And the good news is we do have these five, these are 18 freedoms
and endowments. We do. And again, and again, and again, we really should not forget this
is not random. It's not co-accidental, as Rupasi says, this is due to all kinds of precious
causes and conditions that have come together. And this is our life. This is everything right
now. And we have that beautiful connection with the Dharma. And we have a beautiful connection
with not only the foundational teachings of the Buddha, but Mahayana and Vajrayana. And
that means too, this is the perfect playground for continuing to develop our merit and our
wisdom. This is the perfect playground to engage, really sincerely take to heart the
four boundless and really activate the six paramitas, really engender our love, our wisdom,
turn our own ego clinging upside down. And then of course, through the skillful means
of the Vajrayana, purify our rough emotions and our perceptions. So this is the perfect
playground for that. That's maybe part of the beautiful causes and conditions. That
is the fulfillment of our long standing bodhicitta aspirations and actions of past lives and
our connection with the Vajrayana teachings. So that's beautiful. And that's why we want
to, again, this precious opportunity doesn't last forever. We have some degree of knowledge
of the laws of karas and effect. And to some degree, we have some vision of all the challenges
of samsara, either through our own direct perception or the words from the omniscient ones. And
we've taken refuge in the three jewels and the three roots, we're doing practice. The
answer to these questions is, I think, keep practicing and looking into the rich meaning
and depth of our practice. Keep practicing both meditation, silent meditation, some formless
meditation, just resting in awareness, following the pith instructions, looking to our own
mind, generating bodhicitta, and all of it, keeping with our nundra practice. But again,
all these conditions are here due to past actions and views. And by connecting with
our practice, by continuing to connect with our joy, our appreciation, our bodhicitta,
and our devotion, and following through with those things, we really, according to the
teachings, we don't have to worry. We just maintain our mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness,
and follow through. Try to keep as authentic as we can, purify our mistakes, bring out
the beauty. So thank you. That's all I'll say for now. And we're going to take a break
from the weekly nundra now for about four weeks, at least. So we'll probably restart
towards the end of May. But we'll send out an announcement to let people know what the
schedule will be for the early summer. So thank you. Have a good evening. Happy spring.